LEARNING.md, before:

# Papers

## Group Tokens
[Multi-Token Joint Speculative Decoding for Accelerating Large Language Model Inference, Qin et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09722v1)

This paper has an innovative point of joint perplexity with multi-token considered together. We shall similarly group tokens.
It is key to understanding the semantic structural embedding.

## What did BERT Heads learn
[What Does BERT Look At? An Analysis of BERT's Attention, Clark et al., 2019](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04341)

It is about what different heads in different layers learned during training. 
1. The attention-based probing classifier that takes attention maps as input. The classifier achieves 77 UAS at dependency parsing
2. The reason why BERT attend to SEP is for "no-op".

## Why BERT heads learn
[Identifying Semantic Induction Heads to Understand In-Context Learning, Ren et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.13055)

It is about how BERT heads was able to capture syntactical and semantical embeddings.

## Implicit Vocabulary which is critical for Semantic Representation
[Token Erasure as a Footprint of Implicit Vocabulary Items in LLMs, Feucht et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.20086)

It talks about finding implicit vocabulary from tokenization, and semantic representation. 

## Structural Probe for Finding Syntax
[A Structural Probe for Finding Syntax in Word Representations. Hewitt et al., 2019](https://aclanthology.org/N19-1419/)
The structure probe found that all syntax trees are implicitly represented in ELMo and BERT but not in traditional word embeddings!
The hierarchical structure of syntax trees is reflected geometrically in the transformed space.

## Recall with attention edge
[Dissecting Recall of Factual Associations in Auto-Regressive Language Models. Geva et al., 2023](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14767)

Attention heads encode subject-attribute mappings and play a crucial role in attribute extraction.
The last-subject position is enriched with multiple related attributes, facilitating flexible and contextualized retrieval.

## Jing Huang's Repo
[Demystifying Verbatim Memorization in Large Language Models., 2025](https://github.com/explanare/verbatim-memorization)

Study verbatim memorization. What about making a loss function to punish the verbatim memorization?


## Semantic Entities as Tensors

[Tensor Decomposition for Signal Processing and Machine Learning. Sidiropoulos et al., 2016](https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.01668)

Basically, we are trying to figure out the hidden latent variable by observing the distribution. Think about Bayesian generative model or HMM. But structured in a high-dimensional space. Why? Because the semantic entities are embedded in high-dimensional space instead of sequential signals.

If we are looking at a paper, we can observe the tokens, of course, and then we can orgnize them structurely, by finding the important clusting of the tokens, for example, the title and the abstract shall receive more attention than the content or citations.

In a hidden latent variable model, the High Order Moment captures the high-dimentional relavance between the observed data. When we have 3 variables, we need the third order moment which is a three dimensional covariance tensors. For 4 variables, we need four-dimensions covariance tensor.

Then, we use CPD to decompose it to find the conditional distribution of each observations.

## CPD for tensors
[Understanding the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC Tensor Decomposition](https://www.alexejgossmann.com/tensor_decomposition_CP/)

## Higher-Order Singular Value Decomposition (HOSVD)
Generalize SVD to high-dimensional space.

##
[Independent Component Analysis: Algorithms and Applications](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0893608000000265)

Attention weight is basically a mixture of the attentions learned from context, sometimes even with a long distance. After many round of trainings, we received a model weight that is mixture of syntatical dependencies, semantical dependencies, and pragmatics dependencies. Now, we need to decompose them into individual components and make them a tensor structure.

Why the LLM is language model instead of a conceptual model? Because it starts from token and end with token. We stopped training when the token prediction is reaasonally accurate. Why shall not we measure the high dimensional dependencies for reasoning, and stop training when the data structure is completed populated?

It is like a student graduate from college, he doesn't have all the world knowledge, but he has great reasoning capability and can resolve college level problems by doing some retrieval and reasoning.

Commit message:

Graph-based Neural Dependency Parser and Causal instead of Coreference

LEARNING.md, after:

# Papers

## Group Tokens
[Multi-Token Joint Speculative Decoding for Accelerating Large Language Model Inference, Qin et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.09722v1)

This paper has an innovative point of joint perplexity with multi-token considered together. We shall similarly group tokens.
It is key to understanding the semantic structural embedding.

## What did BERT Heads learn
[What Does BERT Look At? An Analysis of BERT's Attention, Clark et al., 2019](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.04341)

It is about what different heads in different layers learned during training. 
1. The attention-based probing classifier that takes attention maps as input. The classifier achieves 77 UAS at dependency parsing
2. The reason why BERT attend to SEP is for "no-op".

## Why BERT heads learn
[Identifying Semantic Induction Heads to Understand In-Context Learning, Ren et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.13055)

It is about how BERT heads was able to capture syntactical and semantical embeddings.


##  Graph-based Neural Dependency Parser

[Graph-based Neural Dependency Parser, Nivre et al., 2017](https://aclanthology.org/K17-3002/)

It is about how to use neural network with graph to do the dependency parsing. Could be used as a gold standard for the parsing.


## Implicit Vocabulary which is critical for Semantic Representation
[Token Erasure as a Footprint of Implicit Vocabulary Items in LLMs, Feucht et al., 2024](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.20086)

It talks about finding implicit vocabulary from tokenization, and semantic representation. 

## Structural Probe for Finding Syntax
[A Structural Probe for Finding Syntax in Word Representations. Hewitt et al., 2019](https://aclanthology.org/N19-1419/)
The structure probe found that all syntax trees are implicitly represented in ELMo and BERT but not in traditional word embeddings!
The hierarchical structure of syntax trees is reflected geometrically in the transformed space.

## Recall with attention edge
[Dissecting Recall of Factual Associations in Auto-Regressive Language Models. Geva et al., 2023](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.14767)

Attention heads encode subject-attribute mappings and play a crucial role in attribute extraction.
The last-subject position is enriched with multiple related attributes, facilitating flexible and contextualized retrieval.

## Jing Huang's Repo
[Demystifying Verbatim Memorization in Large Language Models., 2025](https://github.com/explanare/verbatim-memorization)

Study verbatim memorization. What about making a loss function to punish the verbatim memorization?


## Semantic Entities as Tensors

[Tensor Decomposition for Signal Processing and Machine Learning. Sidiropoulos et al., 2016](https://arxiv.org/abs/1607.01668)

Basically, we are trying to figure out the hidden latent variable by observing the distribution. Think about Bayesian generative model or HMM. But structured in a high-dimensional space. Why? Because the semantic entities are embedded in high-dimensional space instead of sequential signals.

If we are looking at a paper, we can observe the tokens, of course, and then we can orgnize them structurely, by finding the important clusting of the tokens, for example, the title and the abstract shall receive more attention than the content or citations.

In a hidden latent variable model, the High Order Moment captures the high-dimentional relavance between the observed data. When we have 3 variables, we need the third order moment which is a three dimensional covariance tensors. For 4 variables, we need four-dimensions covariance tensor.

Then, we use CPD to decompose it to find the conditional distribution of each observations.

## CPD for tensors
[Understanding the CANDECOMP/PARAFAC Tensor Decomposition](https://www.alexejgossmann.com/tensor_decomposition_CP/)

## Higher-Order Singular Value Decomposition (HOSVD)
Generalize SVD to high-dimensional space.

##
[Independent Component Analysis: Algorithms and Applications](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0893608000000265)

Attention weight is basically a mixture of the attentions learned from context, sometimes even with a long distance. After many round of trainings, we received a model weight that is mixture of syntatical dependencies, semantical dependencies, and pragmatics dependencies. Now, we need to decompose them into individual components and make them a tensor structure.

Why the LLM is language model instead of a conceptual model? Because it starts from token and end with token. We stopped training when the token prediction is reaasonally accurate. Why shall not we measure the high dimensional dependencies for reasoning, and stop training when the data structure is completed populated?

It is like a student graduate from college, he doesn't have all the world knowledge, but he has great reasoning capability and can resolve college level problems by doing some retrieval and reasoning.
